Scrum ceremonies—also known as Scrum events, Scrum meetings, or Agile ceremonies—are a key
component of the Scrum process.

The four Scrum ceremonies are:

Sprint planning
Daily stand-up
Sprint review
Sprint retrospective

Sprint planning occurs before the sprint, daily stand-up meetings take place during the sprint,
and the review and retrospective come after the sprint has ended.

These four Scrum ceremonies form the backbone of the Scrum methodology. 
Proper planning, check-ins, and reflection empower teams to stay efficient, motivated, and 
mindful of their progress. Plus, reviewing each sprint’s challenges, accomplishments, and 
lessons helps make subsequent sprints more effective. Now, let’s take a closer look at each
of the Scrum ceremonies.

Sprint planning
If your team starts sprinting without proper planning, everyone will end up running in different
directions. The first Scrum ceremony—sprint planning—creates a road map for the upcoming product 
development sprint.

The sprint planning session doesn’t have to be time-consuming; an hour or two should be enough to
get everyone on the same page for a one- or two-week sprint. The Scrum team, the product owner, 
and the Scrum Master should be present at the planning session.

During the sprint planning session, the team consults the backlog, which is a list of all desired
features and bug fixes that the team can select from as they determine what to accomplish during 
the sprint.

During the sprint planning meeting, the Scrum team will estimate how many items from the 
backlog they can complete with their existing resources. The Scrum Master facilitates the 
meeting, the product owner clarifies the details and requirements of the backlog items, and 
the team members define the work and effort necessary to complete each backlog item chosen 
for the sprint. A centralized work management platform may be used to organize the full backlog 
as well as each individual sprint.

Daily stand-up
Stand-up meetings—also called the daily Scrum—ensure the sprint is proceeding effectively.
Traditionally, Scrum Masters keep the daily Scrum to no longer than 15 minutes. These stand-up
meetings are informal gatherings designed to help identify any roadblocks and allow team members
to describe their current tasks, goals, and obstacles.

Ideally, the daily Scrum should take place at the beginning of the day with the Scrum Master, 
product owner, and complete Scrum team. While many teams choose to have their daily meetings 
in-person, remote get-togethers are also effective.

One way to prevent daily Scrums from exceeding 15 minutes is to ensure everyone is on the same 
page before the meetings begin. Many Scrum teams use a modern work management platform to help 
track each component’s progress. If the Scrum Master or product owner notices that someone is 
falling behind, they can ask about the issue even before the daily meeting.

The daily Scrum keeps each team member accountable. While leaders should never belittle or 
embarrass team members at standups, the requirement to report progress each day can motivate 
developers to stay efficient and productive.

Sprint review
After the team has completed the sprint, it’s time to meet with the stakeholders in a sprint 
review meeting (also called an “iteration review”). The Scrum team, Scrum Master, and product 
owner meet with other teams, managers, and executives to showcase what they accomplished during 
the sprint. Ideally, the sprint review allows each team member to participate. The review’s tone 
should be enthusiastic and positive—it’s an excellent opportunity to celebrate the team’s 
accomplishments.

Of course, Scrum teams should also solicit feedback from stakeholders. In many cases, teams may 
need to change or update the products they built during the sprint. Revision requests aren’t a 
bad thing; a continually iterative, evolving process is the essence of the Scrum philosophy.

The sprint review should last as long as necessary to fully demonstrate the team’s new technology
and have a productive conversation with stakeholders. After the sprint review, Scrum teams move
on to the sprint retrospective.

Sprint retrospective
The final Scrum ceremony is the sprint retrospective. During this last phase, the development 
team, the Scrum Master, and the product owner meet to discuss the sprint’s successes, challenges,
and insights. The retrospective usually lasts around an hour.

Using feedback from stakeholders and the Scrum Master, the team should identify how it can 
improve its processes to have more effective sprints in the future. Agility and adaptability 
are core values of the Scrum process, so teams should strive to identify potential improvements
without blame or judgment.